---
layout: article
title: "Rubber Meets the Road: Classroom Lessons Learned from Seattle"
subnav: blog
comments: true
tagline: 'When Seattle first debuted in 2009, it brought to life several
exciting ideas. For starters, it demonstrated the potential of cloud technology
that could securely run on donated devices. It also gave educators..'
author: '<a href="/people#lois_delong">Lois Anne DeLong</a>'
categories:
  - '<a href="/projects#seattle">Seattle</a>'

---  

When [Seattle](https://seattle.poly.edu/html/) first debuted in 2009, it brought
to life several exciting ideas.
For starters, it demonstrated the potential of cloud technology that could
 securely run on donated devices.
It also gave educators a powerful new way to show novice student programmers how
networks actually function.
In less than a decade, it has spawned a number of new applications, and has
taught thousands of students in 100 classrooms around the world concepts in
cloud computing, networking, distributed systems, and parallel programming.
Increasingly, Seattle has also provided an effective method for teaching
the basics of systems security.

As its name may indicate, Seattle was initially developed at the University of
Washington, the brainchild of several researchers, including SSL director Justin
Cappos. The program offered researchers a way to “run code on any device and
safely share computer resources,”thus turning “any device into a cloud
provider,” Cappos explains. Developed at a time when cloud computing was just
coming to prominence, Seattle offered an easy-to-use platform
for tapping the potential of this technology.

Recently, Cappos, and research professor Albert Rafetseder, an early adopter of
the technology, reflected on the evolution of this project into an effective
teaching tool. Cappos also shares some lessons learned along the way about the
best ways to introduce new teaching technologies.

According to Cappos, Seattle’s initial set of adopters were intended to be
educators. Early on in its development, two decisions were made that shaped
the overall nature of the project. First, these testbeds were designed to be
easy to use, so developers with little experience could get up to speed quickly.
And, secondly, Seattle was to be a free “community project,” with interested
individuals and universities donating computational power, storage, and making
improvements to the Seattle software. In addition, it was designed agnostic of
any particular language or operating system, so it could be run over a wide
number of platforms.

Support for the new project was generated in a somewhat unusual way. “In the
initial phase of the project, I gave 100 talks at schools around the country and
ran demos of Seattle for faculty and students. We built an audience for the
product that way.” As the talks drew in supporters, users, and a growing number
of donated devices, the research team decided to write a few “prepackaged”
assignments for use in networking classes. The inspiration for these assignments
 was what was currently being taught.
According to Rafetseder, the Seattle classroom materials “developed naturally”
as a way to “show off how easily the platform enables you to do interesting
experiments.” This approach of "teaching something moderately complex by building
on simple examples,” has also allowed students a great deal of flexibility to use
Seattle for projects that match their interests.

Exposing students to “real networks,” such as internet sites, and letting them
see “real world latency, firewalls, and other things that they would not
otherwise have hands-on experience with,” has been the primary benefit of
Seattle’s educational offerings. But, both Rafetseder and Cappos point to other
plusses of the software’s use in the classroom. Cappos observes that using the
program prevents students from “accessing and using existing libraries, which
students often use as crutches” when developing a program. Rafetseder cites how
it allows students to learn “how many things go wrong in computer networks all
the time, and how brilliantly smart yet relatively simple the algorithms that
govern the networks are.”
He adds that “it's great to let students experience that network protocol design
is tough,” and “that there is hardly ever an optimum set of parameters, or an
algorithm that is guaranteed to work under all circumstances.”

When queried as to how Seattle is being used today, Cappos acknowledges that,
as an [open source](https://github.com/SeattleTestbed) project, “we don’t
always know who is using it unless people tell us.” All the necessary code can
be accessed through the Seattle website,
free of charge and, for users that do not use one of the Seattle clearinghouses,
Seattle can be used without the need for any type of registration. The
advantages of such an approach to universities and research communities are
obvious, but Cappos acknowledges that occasionally it has its issues.  Recalling
one of the project’s earliest educational adoptions, he explains “there were
problems with the platform.
Unfortunately we didn’t get errors or complaints till much later, when the user
told us,‘this has been broken for a week.’ As a result of that encounter, we
added bettermonitoring, but even now, we don’t exactly know in how many, or in
what ways Seattle is being used.” When feedback is received, however, it is
generally favorable.

As Seattle begins to close in on its first decade, Cappos notes there has been
something of a shift in which faculty are accessing the program, from networking
classes to system security classes. Seattle’s ability to create reference
monitors makes it increasingly appealing to faculty looking to offer their
students hand-on experience in security topics. Another shift that may grow in
the future is away from using Seattle on computers and towards smart devices.
Running Seattle, or its spin-off
project  Sensibility Testbed, on smartphones and tablets “provides a direct way of
interacting with the device thanks to quick code turnaround times,”
Rafetseder states.
“Feedback is immediate. I think this is of great use for newcomers.”

Asked to summarize the lessons learned from Seattle’s educational components,
Cappos shared the following observations:

* **Know your audience.** “We never take the attitude that Seattle is a finished
product.
We have found it valuable to be able to look over someone’s shoulder to see how
they implement the projects.”

* **Eat your own cat food.** ”We have used and built on the tools we created.
In our case, we used Seattle code to implement new tools and products. For
example, the code base in Seattle was used in Sensibility Testbed, which adds
the ability to safely and securely collect data from sensors on mobile devices.”

* **Make it easy for others to fix your mistakes.** By presenting Seattle as an
open source project, “we have made it easier for people to collaborate with us.”
Cappos is genuinely proud of the fact that “more than 100 people have worked on
Seattle at one point or another through its history. We have viewed our role as
‘quality control.’ We allowed the program to scale, addressing problems as they
were called to our attention. In doing so, people are much more invested than
if they had simply purchased the product.”
