---
layout: article
title: "Welcome to Brooklyn: Summer is Intern Season"
subnav: blog
comments: true
tagline: 'Over the past few weeks, SSL has welcomed a diverse group of summer
interns to 2 Metrotech. A total of 11 undergraduate, master’s, and high school
students are now conducting hands-on research in advancement of...'
author: '<a href="/people#lois_delong">Lois Anne DeLong</a>'
categories:
  - '<a href="/projects#uptane">Uptane</a>'
  - '<a href="/projects#seattle">Seattle</a>'
  - '<a href="/projects#lind">Lind</a>'
  - '<a href="/projects#in-toto">in-toto</a'
  - '<a href="/projects#atomsofconfusion">Atoms of Confusion</a> and'
  - '<a href="/projects#CrashSimulator">CrashSimulator</a>'

---
Over the past few weeks, SSL has welcomed a diverse group of summer interns to
2 Metrotech. A total of 11 undergraduate, master’s, and high school students are
now conducting hands-on research in advancement of eight different lab
initiatives. Drawn from three different NYU campuses, and a number of other
academic institutions, the interns are tackling real-world projects ranging
from the design of a compromise-resilient update framework for devices on
the Internet of Things to learning more about kernel paths in order to design
safer virtual machines.

This post offers a brief introduction to a few of the interns. In future posts,
the interns themselves may be sharing some insights on their projects and
lessons learned from their summer in Brooklyn.

<a href="/people#shikhar_sakhuja">Shikhar Sakhuja</a> and
<a href="/people#cynthia_xin_tong">Cynthia Xin Tong</a>, both rising juniors,
come to us from NYU’s Shanghai and Abu Dhabi campuses, respectively. Shikhar
found himself in the somewhat unique position of serving as lab spokesperson
shortly after his arrival, as he worked with
<a href="/people#trishank_kuppusamy">Dr. Trishank Karthik Kuppusamy</a> in
crafting a [lab response](https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/blog/2017-07-03-NTIA)
to a request for comments issued by the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). He will be researching
issues related to the design of secure software update systems for the
Internet of Things. Cynthia, who has experience in doing web development,
was given a brand new design challenge in her work with the
[Seattle](https://seattle.poly.edu/html/) project.
She is investigating current-day DHTs (Distributed Hash Tables) for their use
as key-value stores. As the summer progresses, she will be designing a library
for the RepyV2 sandbox that can interface with the DHT lookup system.

Current NYU Tandon students <a href="/people#parina_kaewkrajang">Parina Kaewkrajang</a>
and <a href="/people#yu_zhang">Yu Zhang</a> are no strangers
to the Brooklyn campus, though Parina mentions it is “somewhat strange to be
running into professors all the time” now that she is on an administrative
floor. Parina, who will be entering her junior year, described her research
task on the [Lind](https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/projects#lind) project as
“analyzing the kernel to secure it.” Yu, a rising
sophomore, and a native of Shanghai, is working on the [Atoms of Confusion](https://atomsofconfusion.com/)
project and has been helping with a new iteration of an online study.

Three of the new interns join us from the Indian Institute of Technology.
<a href="/people#shikher_verma">Shikher Verma</a> is a senior at the Kanpur
campus of this institution, while
<a href="/people#sachit_malik">Sachit Malik</a> and
<a href="/people#yash_gautam">Yash Gautam</a> are from the Delhi campus. Shikher
and Sachit are both working on aspects of the [in-toto](https://in-toto.github.io/)
project, while Yash is working
on Lind, examining function calls between shared libraries.

For <a href="/people#ryan_patton">Ryan Patton</a>, a Long Island native and
rising senior from Williams College
in Massachusetts, his summer at SSL is a chance for more hands-on exposure to
research. As a predominantly liberal arts school, Ryan describes his CS program
at Williams as “theoretical.” However, he was somewhat surprised when he
initially found himself working on “30 year old kernel code.” His research
on the [CrashSimulator](https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/projects#crashsimulator)
project, a sprouting technology at the lab that simulates
real-world conditions for testing new application, is Indicative of how newer
systems are often built on old legacy code.

Several of the interns have expressed appreciation for the “approachability”
of the professors in the department, and the helpfulness of the graduate
students with whom they are working (<a href="/people#santiago_torres">Santiago Torres-Arias</a>, <a href="/people#yiwen_li">YiWen Li</a>,
<a href="/people#preston_moore">Preston Moore</a>, Trishank Kuppusamy,
<a href="/people#dan_gopstein">Dan Gopstein</a>), along with research professor
<a href="/people#albert_rafetseder">Albert Rafetseder</a> (Seattle, Sensibility)
and staff developer <a href="/people#lukas_pühringer">Lukas Pühringer</a>
(Seattle, Sensibility, and in-toto).

Also joining us this summer are <a href="/people#christopher_lo">Christopher Lo</a>,
<a href="/people#shiv_lakhanpal">Shiv Lakhanpal</a>, and <a href="/people#brandon_zhu">Brandon Zhu</a>.

Though it was still early in their stay when interviewed, almost all the interns
had already experienced some surprises. Parina was somewhat amazed at how much
time is spent “looking up things you don’t understand on Google or Stack
Overflow,” a point that many of the interns agreed with.
For Shikher, the surprise was the potential immediate impact of his work. As a
physics major at IIT, research meant “working on something that would be applied
150 years from now.” The idea that the work he is doing today could be
implemented in a matter of weeks or months was an appealing realization.
Sachit agreed with this assessment that it was a different experience to be
“working on practical things that could be deployed so quickly.”

On a somewhat more personal note, Sachit observed he was surprised to find a
piano over at Metrotech. He has been enjoying the chance to play the instrument
in his spare time.  While improving piano skills isn’t the goal of the
internship, <a href="/people#justin_cappos">Prof. Cappos</a> is supportive of
students branching out.
“Having diverse and unique perspectives helps us to tackle a problem in a
different way.”
