---
layout: article
title: "All in One Day’s Work: Fourth Sensibility Testbed Hackathon"
subnav: blog
comments: true
tagline: 'For four years, the Sensibility Testbed project has thrown down a gauntlet
to students——in less than one day, use the platform to design and test a
new sensor...'
author: '<a href="/people#yanyan_zhuang">Yanyan Zhuang</a>'
categories:
  - '<a href="/projects#sensibility">Sensibility</a>'

---  

For four years, the Sensibility Testbed project has thrown down a gauntlet
to students——in less than one day, use the platform to design and test a new sensor
application that can work on smartphones and tablets. We hosted our latest
Sensibility Hackathon, on March 14, 2017 at Rowan University in Glassboro, NJ,
in conjunction with the IEEE Sensors Applications Symposium [(SAS)](http://2017.sensorapps.org/).  Five student
teams participated in the event, with Claudio Crema
from the University of Brescia, and Majed Alowaidi from the University of Ottawa
receiving the top prizes of new Android phones. Crema and Alowaidi were
recognized for an app that scans nearby WiFi networks to identify
the access router with the best signal quality, and then suggests that router to
the user.

The competition started with a one-hour tutorial on how to use Sensibility
Testbed, and then participants had a little more than four hours
(subtracting time for a lunch break) to design
their app before introducing it in a five minute “elevator pitch” to other
workshop attendees. Apps were demonstrated at the Awards ceremony during the
conference banquet, and judged for their “impact on society, and the completeness
of implementation.”  In addition to the phones awarded to the winners, the top
three teams were also given certificates.

The Hackathon has become a mainstay of the Sensor Application Development
Workshop,  held in conjunction with the IEEE Sensors Applications Symposium (SAS).
Part of the challenge of this competition is that most participants have little
or no knowledge of Sensibility Testbed. The fact that the teams are able to work
effectively with the program with little training is a testament to our claims
that Sensibility is easy to use.

This year’s participants benefitted from a simplified installation and set-up
procedure for the [Sensibility app](https://github.com/SensibilityTestbed/instructions).
It now takes just a few simple steps to get the program running.
The only challenge we observed was that many of our Windows laptop users had to
install and quickly learn how to use Python,the language in which Sensibility
code is written. However, this did not appear to be a significant stumbling block.

Feedback on the Hackathon was very positive, with a number of participants
expressing that the program was well prepared,and that most attendees enjoyed
the demos at the Awards ceremony. Many thanks to Sensibility team members
Justin Cappos,Lukas Pühringer, and Albert Rafetseder who helped to run the event.

We look forward to the fifth year of the Hackathon, which will be held in
Seoul, South Korea in March 2018.
