---

layout: article
title: "Make Popular Paths Popular"
subnav: blog
comments: true
tagline: 'Nowadays, untrusted or buggy programs are everywhere, from plugins
running in your web browser, to a third-party Python library running on your
local machine. As awareness of the scope of this problem grows...'
author: '<a href="/people#yiwen_li">Yiwen Li</a>'
categories:
  - '<a href="/projects#lind">Lind</a>'

---
Nowadays, untrusted or buggy programs are everywhere, from plugins running
in your web browser, to a third-party Python library running on your local
machine. As awareness of the scope of this problem grows, many people are
turning to containers to protect their system from the security breaches these
untrusted programs can cause. Containers have become an attractive solution
because, as the name implies, they can provide isolation, and “contain”
programs run inside of them. With emerging containerization tools,
such as [Kubernetes](https://kubernetes.io)
and [Docker](https://www.docker.com), providing practical solutions for
deploying and running programs, more and more people are choosing containers.

However, as use of the technology has expanded, it has become clear that
“containers” do not really contain all that well. Ultimately, they have to
rely on the underlying host kernel to perform core functionalities, such as
file system operations, network, etc. With so many [security vulnerabilities](https://www.cvedetails.com/product/47/Linux-Linux-Kernel.html?vendor_id=33)
inside the host kernel, giving it access to risky code could create
a huge problem.

As containers cannot function without access to the host kernel, then the
question becomes can we identify where the bugs may be located and prevent
access to those areas? Almost two years ago, as part of the Lind project,
we developed and tested a metric that could predict where bugs are likely
to be located in the Linux kernel. The central idea is that the [“popular paths”](https://ssl.engineering.nyu.edu/papers/li_lind_usenix_2017.pdf ),”
which refer to lines of code frequently executed by popular user programs,
contain fewer bugs and so, if access could be limited to these paths, the
chance of triggering bugs would be greatly reduced.

In the work referenced above, we showed it was possible to build a virtual
machine that functioned with only limited access to the kernel. After obtaining
the popular paths for an Ubuntu system by running the top 50 packages from
the [Ubuntu popularity contest](https://popcon.ubuntu.com), we were able to
demonstrate that these paths in the Linux kernel tend to contain fewer
security bugs. Thus, by restricting access to risky “unpopular paths,”
bugs could be effectively prevented from being triggered in the kernel.
We defined a standard procedure, which we called “Lock-in-Pop,” that anyone
could follow to obtain the “popular paths” for a favorite virtual machine.

So can we now apply this metric and the notion of restricting path access
to containers and other types of virtualization systems? The next stage of  
popular paths research suggests we can. Currently, we are using the metric
to develop a “safe mode” of the Linux kernel, which can be used to run the
[LinuxKit container](https://github.com/linuxkit/linuxkit). In our preliminary
experiment, we ran 14 popular Docker containers from [Docker Hub](https://hub.docker.com/explore/)
with LinuxKit, and used the Gcov kernel profiling tool to capture the kernel
trace. We were able to obtain the “popular paths” for LinuxKit, and then
inserted the kernel panic() system call at the beginning of the
“unpopular paths” to prevent access to this risky code in the host kernel.
We modified more than twenty three thousand functions in the Linux kernel,
which accounts for about one third of its total number of functions. And we
verified that the LinuxKit container can still perform required functions
with our modified host Linux kernel. Though we are still running tests at
this time, we have reason to believe that with this method of trimming the
kernel, the issue of negotiating access to untrusted code can be addressed.

For software developers and users who run programs in containers, staying
on the popular paths could significantly enhance the security of the host
kernel. With this in mind, we actively encourage researchers and developers
to try out the metric in container measurements and security evaluations.
If enough researchers can help us “make popular paths popular,” and are
willing to share their results, we believe the insights gained could lead to
more secure virtualization systems.   
