---
layout: article
title: "Fog Computing Brings the Cloud Closer to the IoT"
subnav: blog
comments: true
tagline: 'There is no doubt that cloud computing is here to stay. A year ago, a study by [Gartner, a prominent research firm](http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3616417) estimated that  “cloud computing in all its guises will grow 18% this year..'
author: '<a href="/people#lois_delong">Lois Anne DeLong</a>'
categories:
  - '<a href="/project#seattle">Seattle</a>'

---  
There is no doubt that cloud computing, in one form or another, is here to stay. In 2017,
[Gartner](http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3616417), a prominent research
firm, estimated an 18% growth in worldwide revenue from the technology by year's end, 
to a total of $246.8 billion. In the light of this growth, it is perhaps not surprising
that cloud computing has already birthed a number of alternative configurations. Unfortunately,
the alternative configurations have also given birth—to a messy hodgepodge of terminology, 
such as edge computing, mist computing, cloudlets and fog computing. 

The problem with this situation is that these terms are often used 
interchangeably, even when the systems they describe have significant differences. 
In addition, without standardized terminology, it is difficult to establish a timeline
for the development of a technology. For example, while the term "fog computing" may have
been commonly used only in the last two to three years, incarnations of what could be called
the basic principle of fog computing—replacing
a centralized cloud with distributed units that
can do all the necessary computation in a data hub on a smart device,
or in a smart router or gateway—have been around almost since the beginning of the
cloud itself. One such example is SSL's own [Seattle Testbed](https://seattle.poly.edu/html/),
which for close to a decade has allowed researchers to securely run 
code on a variety of device (laptops, tablets, smartphones) using 
computation power and storage donated by universities and individuals. 

Last year, the National Institute of Standards and Technology stepped in to "clear
the fog" and provide some needed clarity to how we talk about this technology
by publishing a document of accepted definitions, characteristics, acronyms and 
abbreviations. The brief report, called simply “The NIST Definition of Fog Computing,” 
sets out to provide “clear distinction” between “fog computing...and related concepts."
The official definition for fog computing put forward in the document is:

>Fog computing is a horizontal, physical or virtual resource paradigm that
>resides between smart end-devices and traditional cloud or data centers.
>This paradigm supports vertically-isolated, latency-sensitive applications
>by providing ubiquitous, scalable, layered, federated, and distributed
>computing, storage, and network connectivity.

The NIST document could not be more timely as fog technologies will be relied on
to support the growing computing needs of smart devices on the Internet of
Things (IoT). The name "fog computing" is a playful interpretation of the way
the architecture of such systems “brings the cloud down to the
ground,” by closing the gap between where data is created and where it is
acted upon. In principle, fog computing systems can perform tasks faster and more
efficiently, as they eliminate the need to send everything to the cloud
for processing. And, with the Gartner firm estimating that, in
just two years time, there will be more than
[20 billion smart devices](http://www.zdnet.com/article/iot-devices-will-outnumber-the-worlds-population-this-year-for-the-first-time/), the flexibility and distributed nature of fog computing systems
will be needed to support that growth.

The researchers involved with the aforementioned Seattle made the case last fall for why the
technology is in a good position to support the
"vertically-isolated, latency-sensitive applications" cited in the NIST definition. 
Fog computing comes with a number of challenges. The first is the rapidly
expanding variety of smart devices.[Yi et al.](http://www.cs.wm.edu/~syi/publications/mobidata15_1.pdf)
note that the variety of resources that can act as servers in a fog system range 
from “resource-poor devices such as set-top boxes, access points, routers, switches, 
base stations, and end devices, or resource-rich machines such as Cloudlet...a ‘cloud in a box’
available for use by nearby mobile devices.” As noted in a [paper](https://github.com/aaaaalbert/fogwc/raw/SUBMITTED/paper.pdf)
presented by SSL research professor Albert Rafetseder at the inaugural Fog World
Congress last November, Seattle is already running on
a variety of heterogeneous nodes, or alternative platforms, such as Android devices,
resource-limited structures like Raspberry Pis, or routers and embedded devices
running OpenWrt. In addition, the “loose coupling and
precise trust boundaries” of Seattle’s components enable “deployments with
minimal mutual trust requirements,” and allow new infrastructure components
to be “introduced freely to replace or augment existing ones, as long as
the component interfaces are adhered to.” This supports the distributed nature
of fog systems.

Most importantly, according to the paper's authors — Rafetseder, Lukas Pühringer,
and Justin Cappos —Seattle’s proven track record in protecting the safety of host
devices and the security of any data on them as a plus for its use in fog computing
applications. Seattle’s [sandboxed environment](https://github.com/SeattleTestbed/repy_v2/blob/master/README.md),
which isolates code run on the devices from other applications and data,
also imposes strict usage quotas for all resources of the hosting system,
including Central Processing Unit (CPU) time and memory, used disk space,
and even IP addresses and port numbers on network interfaces. And, from a
security standpoint, isolation keeps buggy or deliberately destructive code
from harming the host machine.

Since fog computing is still in its infancy, it may be too soon to predict
what components or systems will ultimately become standard. In a conversation
conducted shortly before the paper was presented, Rafetseder described the
“uncertainty” attached to the Fog concept.  “We don't know if it will be widely
deployed, what deployments will actually look like, or what companies and use
cases there will be. However, we know from experience with Seattle that our
architecture is quite well prepared for whatever shape the landscape will turn out to take.”

(Note: the final version of the NIST must be purchased, but the draft circulated for comment
period is available at https://csrc.nist.gov/csrc/media/publications/sp/800-191/draft/documents/sp800-191-draft.pdf.) 
