---

layout: article
title: "What makes confusing code so confusing? Current Atoms initiatives look
for the Hows, Whys and Wheres"
subnav: blog
comments: true
tagline: 'The Atoms of Confusion project deals with perhaps the most random
variable in the development of software—the human programmer who writes and/or
maintains the code. The contention of...'
author: '<a href="/people#lois_delong">Lois Anne DeLong</a>'
categories:
  - '<a href="/projects#atoms">Atoms of Confusion</a>'
---

The Atoms of Confusion project deals with perhaps the most random variable in
the development of software—the human programmer who writes and/or maintains
the code. The contention of the Atom’s research team is that there can be issues
within a piece of code that cause programmers to make costly or potentially
damaging assumptions about its output. As such, the project explores how elements
in the code affect human comprehension.

In a relatively short span of time, the group has conducted and evaluated the
results of two carefully constructed user studies, and has obtained empirical
proof that there are small, self-contained patterns within lines of code that
could cause programmer confusion. To date, 15 of these patterns have been
identified and confirmed as “Atoms of Confusion,” including several ignored by
most commonly-used style guides, and, one---the use of curly braces---where our
findings contradicted both the [NASA](http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/dts/pm/Papers/nasa-c-style.pdf)
and [Linux](https://slurm.schedmd.com/coding_style.pdf) style guides.

By the time the paper documenting these study results was presented at the
Foundations of Software Engineering Conference in September, 2017, the
research team—which in addition to students, faculty, and staff at NYU Tandon
also includes personnel at the Pennsylvania State University and the University
of Colorado, Colorado Springs---had opened its research efforts on several new
fronts. One group began to measure factors that can affect levels of confusion,
such as where the atoms are located within a piece a code, while another looked
at how these confusing patterns influence brain activity in developers. Still
another group set out to see just how omnipresent these atoms are within code
"in the wild," by conducting a quantitative assessment of the frequency of atoms
in real-world software.

Here is a brief review of the research initiatives the Atoms of Confusion
project has undertaken over the past year.

#### __Atoms Do Exist in the Wild__

While the initial studies did prove the existence of Atoms of Confusion, its
original code corpus was selected precisely for its likelihood to contain atoms.
That left an important question to answer: were these confusing patterns just as
prevalent “in the wild?” A group led by NYU Tandon Ph.D. student Dan Gopstein
identified a corpus of 14 of “the most popular and influential open source C
and C++ projects” to measure the amount of atoms, if any, that they might
contain. They found that the 15 confirmed atoms occurred “millions of times
in programs like the Linux kernel and GCC, appearing on average once every 23 lines.”

The research team, which also included Hongwei Henry Zhou, and faculty members
Phyllis Frankl and Justin Cappos, summed up the significance of this work by
noting it demonstrated “that beyond simple misunderstanding in a lab setting,
Atoms of Confusion are both prevalent---occurring often in real projects---and
meaningful,” as they are “being removed by bug-fix commits at an elevated rate.”
A [paper](https://atomsofconfusion.com/papers/atom-finder-msr-2018.pdf)
documenting the Atoms Finder work was presented at the Mining Software Repositories
conference in Gothenburg, Sweden in May, and was honored by conference organizers
as a distinguished paper. This marks the second time this recognition has been
given to an Atoms paper, and also the second time a paper on which Gopstein
was lead author has been so honored.

#### __What Programmers are Really Thinking When they Think about Code__

As the Atoms project evolves, one question the team continues to return to is
“why are these code patterns confusing?” While the answer probably lies in a
confluence of physical and psychological factors, one line of investigation
that could prove helpful is learning how confusion manifests itself in the
brain waves of programmers. Martin K.C. Yeh, an Atoms team member from the
Pennsylvania State University, has been using an inexpensive, non-invasive
EEG device to record the brain activity of developers when shown both confusing
and non-confusing code snippets. The results of a pilot study on 8 subjects
indicate that more neurons may be active when a subject is solving confusing
code snippets.

Yeh summarized his findings from the pilot study in a  [paper](https://atomsofconfusion.com/papers/program-comprehension-eeg-2017.pdf),
delivered at the Frontiers in Education
Conference in October 2017. Coauthored by Gopstein, Yanyan Zhuang, and Yu Yan,
the paper also suggested that “intelligent tutoring systems” might
be able to incorporate EEG “as an input to provide detailed explanations,
extra practices, additional examples, or select different instructional
strategies” when brainwaves suggest confusion.

Since that presentation, Yeh has completed a second round of tests using a larger
subject pool and he is currently analyzing the results.

#### __Other Initiatives__
The Atoms of Confusion team has three other initiatives currently
in process.
* Examining the influence of an atom’s position within a snippet of code on its
 ability to create confusion.
* Identifying more potential atoms for testing and confirmation
* Determining the effect of developers' native languages on their perception of
 code, and their susceptibility to atoms.
To follow the progress of the Atoms of Confusion project, check our
 [web site](https://atomsofconfusion.com/).
